[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: Let me elaborate. When you go out for coffee or dinner with friends,
[Amit Varma]: do you force them to eat whatever you're having or what you feel is good for them?
[Amit Varma]: No, you don't. You respect the individual autonomy and you expect them to respect yours, as they usually do.
[Amit Varma]: At the end when the bill comes, you might insist on paying for it yourself,
[Amit Varma]: but you never insist that one of them pays for it.
[Amit Varma]: You don't steal money from their wallet when they are not looking and you don't try to leave the restaurant without paying.
[Amit Varma]: And if you see a beggar outside and feel sorry for him,
[Amit Varma]: you may leave the beggar something of your own volition,
[Amit Varma]: but you would think it outrageous to pay nothing yourself, but force your friends to pay.
[Amit Varma]: You see what I'm getting at here, right?
[Amit Varma]: We all respect the autonomy of others and we all respect the choices they make.
[Amit Varma]: Consent is a big deal for us and we don't try to force other adults to do things against their wish.
[Amit Varma]: We agree that violence is bad, except in self-defense. We believe in the dignity of the individual.
[Unknown]: We are all libertarians.
[Amit Varma]: We have no objection to state violence or to the state doing things to us that we would be outraged if anyone else did.
[Amit Varma]: We misunderstand how society works and believe that societies and economies can be planned and engineered
[Amit Varma]: and ignore the fact that such planning on the behalf of others always involves violence.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, the everyday violence we face has been normalized so much that we don't think of it as violence at all.
[Amit Varma]: Now, it's what I call the liberal paradox that we need the state to protect our rights and its existence does imply a certain amount of violence.
[Amit Varma]: But the modern state, everywhere in the world and especially in India, goes far beyond this.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a battle that libertarians constantly fight.
[Amit Varma]: This normalization of violence, this overriding of individual rights in the name of an illusory greater good,
[Amit Varma]: the daily assaults on human dignity.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a man I admire deeply.
[Amit Varma]: David Boaz wrote the book that first introduced me to the ideas of libertarianism, which I read at the turn of the millennium.
[Amit Varma]: That book was called Libertarianism, a Primer, which he updated and expanded a few years ago into a fantastic book called The Libertarian Mind.
[Amit Varma]: He writes prolifically about libertarianism and works now as an executive vice president at the Cato Institute in Washington, D.C.
[Amit Varma]: He has also been the editor of the Libertarian Reader, an excellent collection of writings about liberalism through the ages,
[Amit Varma]: and the co-editor of the Cato Handbook for Congress and the Cato Handbook on Policy, which are brilliant guides to good governance.
[Amit Varma]: He was kind enough to give me two hours of his time and we chatted over Skype.
[Amit Varma]: Before we go to the conversation though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of The Seen and The Unseen is brought to you by Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app.
[Amit Varma]: They have thousands of audiobooks that you can listen to on your mobile,
[Amit Varma]: including hundreds in local languages like Hindi and Marathi, and unlimited monthly subscription costs only Rs. 299 per month.
[Amit Varma]: And you can also get a 30-day free trial if you hop on over to storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: I actually use Storytel myself regularly, so as long as they sponsor the show, I'm going to recommend one book a week that I love.
[Amit Varma]: The book I'm recommending today is an obvious choice.
[Amit Varma]: It's by our guest for this episode, David Bowes.
[Amit Varma]: It's his first book, Libertarianism, a Primer, which is available on Storytel in both audiobook and e-book format.
[Amit Varma]: His other two books, Libertarian Mind, which is an update of that, is available in e-book format as is a Libertarian reader.
[Amit Varma]: But Libertarianism, a Primer, you can actually listen to it.
[Amit Varma]: So do check that out on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: And remember, you get a 30-day free trial only at storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: David, welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: David, before we start off, tell me a little bit about you and about how you came to libertarian ideas.
[Amit Varma]: Because when you were kind of growing up in the States, libertarian ideas weren't so common back then, right?
[Guest]: Well, that's right.
[Guest]: On the other hand, basic libertarian ideas about individual freedom and self-reliance and not trusting the government are pretty basic to America.
[Guest]: So in that sense, there was a decent background there.
[Guest]: I grew up in Kentucky, in the middle of the country, sort of the South.
[Guest]: And my parents were well-educated.
[Guest]: I always say I'm the first in my family not to be a lawyer.
[Guest]: So there was political conversation in my house.
[Guest]: Not sure my brother and sister paid that much attention to it.
[Guest]: But I talked about politics and policy somewhat with my parents.
[Guest]: And then when I was in high school, I read Barry Goldwater's Conscience of a Conservative,
[Guest]: which is actually a very libertarian book because much of American conservatism is very libertarian.
[Guest]: And then I read Economics in One Lesson by Henry Hazlitt.
[Guest]: And then I read Ayn Rand.
[Guest]: And by that point, I was pretty much on the way to being a committed libertarian.
[Guest]: And yes, finding actual libertarianism there around 1970, early 70s, was pretty hard.
[Unknown]: It was a small movement.
[Guest]: And of course, we had no internet.
[Guest]: So it was harder to find.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, back then, there was no Cato, no Students for Liberty, no Reason magazine.
[Amit Varma]: How do you sort of find other people who think like you?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, are there moments of sort of self-doubt when where you wonder,
[Amit Varma]: is there something wrong with me?
[Amit Varma]: Because I'm the only one who looks at the world like this.
[Guest]: Well, I don't know that I ever felt quite like that.
[Guest]: Like I say, there are basic libertarian ideas that suffuse American thought.
[Guest]: Ayn Rand was a best-selling author, and it wasn't hard as a high school student to discover
[Guest]: Ayn Rand's work.
[Guest]: I sort of stumbled on Henry Hazlitt, but Barry Goldwater had run for president on
[Guest]: a very conservative, but in some ways libertarian platform.
[Guest]: So people knew about that.
[Guest]: And what happened was that when I got to college, I joined a conservative group,
[Guest]: Young Americans for Freedom.
[Guest]: And of course, they said they were for freedom.
[Guest]: And we were for free markets and free enterprise.
[Guest]: And I came to discover partly by reading their magazine, oh, I see these tensions in conservatism.
[Guest]: Sometimes they're for freedom.
[Guest]: Sometimes they're talking about imposed order.
[Guest]: And it's the freedom part that I like.
[Guest]: Once you got hold of a copy of Reason magazine, then you would see ads for other libertarian
[Guest]: projects.
[Guest]: So I met people in college and then after college.
[Guest]: It was actually an exciting time.
[Guest]: For libertarians, I should also mention there was the Foundation for Economic Education,
[Guest]: FEE.
[Guest]: And a lot of young conservatives got FEE's magazine, The Freeman.
[Guest]: And that was a way to get connected to a network of people who did believe in freedom.
[Guest]: But the mid 1970s was a pretty exciting time because you did have the Libertarian Party
[Guest]: being founded.
[Guest]: You had Hayek.
[Guest]: And Friedman winning Nobel Prizes.
[Guest]: You had Robert Nozick's book coming out and winning a National Book Award.
[Guest]: A little bit after that, then you did have the creation of the Cato Institute.
[Guest]: And of course, Reason magazine, I think, goes back to 1969.
[Guest]: So it was a smaller and less professional looking magazine then.
[Guest]: But it was an exciting time.
[Guest]: It was the beginning of a movement.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, just looking back at when I grew up in New York, I was a little bit more
[Amit Varma]: conservative, but looking back at when I grew up in India, which was somewhat later than
[Amit Varma]: you, and we obviously didn't have these fundamental American values of individual freedom and
[Amit Varma]: so on, which, you know, is embedded in your constitution and your way of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: Over here, I often say that India's biggest religion is a religion of government.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, statism is just sort of reflexive.
[Amit Varma]: State violence is completely normalized.
[Amit Varma]: And so it was very refreshing for me almost a couple of decades ago to read your book
[Amit Varma]: later, updated to the libertarian mind, which came out a few years ago.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what I found interesting about the libertarian mind was at the start of it, you write about
[Amit Varma]: how the world is becoming more libertarian.
[Amit Varma]: And if you look at the broader arc of history, that certainly seems to be true to some extent
[Amit Varma]: at that time.
[Amit Varma]: But now, now that we live in the age of Trump and, you know, in India, Modi, for example,
[Amit Varma]: authoritarian populace across the world coming to power, and the discourse everywhere being
[Amit Varma]: arguments between different kinds of statism and not for liberty at all.
[Amit Varma]: Are you still as optimistic?
[Guest]: Well, maybe not as optimistic, but I actually would sort of.
[Guest]: Let's look at three things there.
[Guest]: One is, is the world getting better?
[Guest]: Yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: The world is getting more prosperous and the prosperity is more widespread.
[Guest]: And the opportunity for people to pursue happiness in their own way is more broadly available
[Guest]: in more countries in the world.
[Guest]: And of course, the good changes in China and India over the past generation account for
[Guest]: a lot of that progress and optimism because there are so many people to whom those changes
[Guest]: are relevant.
[Guest]: So our website, humanprogress.org, details continuing progress on hunger, illiteracy,
[Guest]: poverty, and so on.
[Guest]: Is the world getting freer, which is somewhat different, though usually connected?
[Guest]: Yes, I think it still is.
[Guest]: I think that the economic reforms in India and I think in China and I think in India,
[Guest]: though I certainly yield to your expertise on that, but also some economic reforms even
[Guest]: happening in Africa, the decline of military dictatorships in Latin America, some policy
[Guest]: reforms in developed countries.
[Guest]: Yes, I think overall we still are seeing more freedom.
[Guest]: Now, what about our politics?
[Guest]: Well, yes, politics seems to have taken a turn for the worse since I was writing The
[Guest]: Libertarian Mind around 2013.
[Guest]: We do have the rise of authoritarians in a lot of places.
[Guest]: I've been saying in speeches lately, ideas we thought were dead are back.
[Guest]: Ideas like socialism, economic nationalism, authoritarianism, even fascism.
[Guest]: And we're facing fundamental challenges to liberalism in a way that in 2013 I probably
[Guest]: didn't sense was the case.
[Guest]: So intellectually and politically, we have big challenges right now, probably more so
[Guest]: than I thought in 2013.
[Guest]: But so far, I think we are still on a path of greater freedom.
[Guest]: But if the politics continues in the direction it's been going the last few years, then that
[Guest]: will change.
[Guest]: And it's interesting that the dead ideas that have been revived that you named like
[Amit Varma]: socialism, economic nationalism, fascism, they're all isms.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of the reason I sometimes feel uncomfortable with the world, with the
[Amit Varma]: word libertarianism, because it seems to imply that it's a system of thinking that depends
[Amit Varma]: on certain facts about the world.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, to me, it's just really a value system.
[Amit Varma]: You respect individual autonomy, the dignity of others, you value consent and you stand
[Amit Varma]: against coercion.
[Amit Varma]: Nothing more and nothing less.
[Amit Varma]: It's not like one of the others in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: So let's let's kind of talk about the fundamentals of sort of libertarianism.
[Amit Varma]: What does it mean to you in simple terms?
[Guest]: What I like to say in speeches is libertarianism is the idea that a democracy is a system of
[Guest]: thinking that adults, individuals have the right and the responsibility to make the important
[Guest]: decisions about their own lives.
[Guest]: And each word is important there.
[Guest]: This is about the rights of adults, not necessarily children.
[Guest]: That's a more complicated issue.
[Guest]: This is also about individuals making decisions, not collectives, not nations to the extent
[Guest]: that we can avoid that, not racial groups and so on.
[Guest]: Have the right, because as.
[Guest]: Individuals as autonomous thinking, rational beings, we have the right to make the important
[Guest]: decisions about our lives.
[Guest]: But with those rights go responsibilities, not imposed responsibilities, but just the
[Guest]: idea that if I make choices, I bear the consequences for the outcome of those choices.
[Guest]: And that's a responsibility.
[Guest]: And when we start thinking about sometimes people listen to that and they say, well,
[Guest]: yes, but we do have that.
[Guest]: But what's your complaint?
[Guest]: Well, of course, my complaint is that the government takes half the income I earn and
[Guest]: it tells me how I have to save for retirement and how I have to give to charity.
[Guest]: It tells me what I can smoke and what I can drink and what I can read and who I can marry.
[Guest]: And obviously not all of those things in any country at any one time.
[Guest]: But but those kinds of things are the decisions that government is arrogating to itself to
[Guest]: make those decisions for me.
[Guest]: I want the right to make those decisions.
[Guest]: But that does mean that there will be consequences.
[Guest]: And so I have a responsibility if I become a drunk or a drug addict.
[Guest]: That's on me.
[Guest]: Mostly if I don't save for my retirement, then I have to assume I have to accept responsibility
[Guest]: for that.
[Guest]: I think parents should have the right to decide where their children will be educated and
[Guest]: how.
[Guest]: That's also a responsibility as a parent.
[Guest]: You should want to make the important decisions about guiding your child's life.
[Guest]: And you you bear the consequences of those decisions.
[Guest]: And of course, so do your children.
[Guest]: And that's why it's so important to get them right.
[Guest]: So in all of those areas, government is impinging, intruding on our right and responsibility to
[Guest]: be fully responsible adults.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there's a really nice quote from your book, which I'm going to read out.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, Libertarians believe in the presumption of liberty.
[Amit Varma]: That is, Libertarians believe that people ought to be free to live as they choose, unless
[Amit Varma]: advocates of coercion can make a compelling case.
[Amit Varma]: It's the exercise of power, not the exercise of freedom that requires justification.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, this is a very profound sentence, because what has happened in our world today,
[Amit Varma]: especially in India, but I think everywhere is a normalization of coercion, where we take
[Amit Varma]: a lot of state violence and state interference in our lives completely for granted.
[Amit Varma]: You know, sometimes when I tell people that taxes are a form of coercion, it's a form
[Amit Varma]: of violence.
[Amit Varma]: And they're like, they look at me aghast as if, you know, what on earth am I talking
[Amit Varma]: about?
[Amit Varma]: It's been so normalized.
[Amit Varma]: And another sentence from your book, which I often, in fact, use at the start of slide
[Amit Varma]: shows when I talk about libertarianism is, quote, in a sense that have always been but
[Amit Varma]: two political philosophies, liberty and power.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And the arc of history really seems to be coming from a point where power is dominant
[Amit Varma]: to a point where liberty is asserting itself more and more.
[Guest]: Well, that's right.
[Guest]: And so all of these things are problems right now, but they have been problems in the past.
[Guest]: And in most societies, they were more severe problems in the past, especially if we go
[Guest]: back before the rise of liberalism in the 17th and 18th centuries.
[Guest]: For obviously, I know the history of the West better.
[Guest]: The combination of church and state, the assumption that everything will stay the same, that
[Guest]: people's places in society are fixed, that if you're born a serf, your children will
[Guest]: be born serfs as well.
[Guest]: All of that was a massive system of organized coercion.
[Guest]: And of course, if you go back before that, we can argue that the the origin of states
[Guest]: was that the strong picked up sticks and threatened to hit or kill the weak.
[Guest]: And that's how some people achieve power over others.
[Guest]: But when liberalism came into the world, that was the problem.
[Guest]: They were concerned about the denial of individual responsibility, of individual thought, freedom
[Guest]: of speech, freedom of religion and the use of power to impose other people's will on
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: And so since liberalism came into the world, in increasing parts of the world, people do
[Guest]: stand up and say that kind of coercion is not right.
[Guest]: Now, you're correct to say that so many kinds of coercion go unchallenged, unnoticed by
[Guest]: most people.
[Guest]: And there are different reasons for that.
[Guest]: And many people believe that it's just necessary for the state to do more things than I think
[Guest]: it's necessary for the state to do.
[Guest]: But there are also many people who have a personal agenda.
[Guest]: They want their religious views imposed on everyone.
[Guest]: They want their political views imposed.
[Guest]: They want the state to take wealth from other people and give it to them or to prevent other
[Guest]: people from competing with them and possibly challenging their economic security.
[Guest]: So there are many reasons that we haven't fully accepted the principle of liberty.
[Guest]: But the principle of liberty, principle of natural rights, of human rights for the past
[Guest]: two or three centuries has been there as a vision and a beacon that can inspire people
[Guest]: and encourage them to push back against power.
[Guest]: What were the American revolutionaries concerned about?
[Guest]: They were concerned about the way Britain was exercising power in this country.
[Guest]: But they were also concerned from their study of history about the general problem of power,
[Guest]: that people with power will always want to extend it.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And I should clarify for my listeners that, you know, I'm saying libertarianism, you're
[Amit Varma]: saying liberalism.
[Amit Varma]: We basically mean the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: It, you know, this started off as liberalism, you know, a belief in human liberty.
[Amit Varma]: And then the term liberalism somehow morphed towards the start of the 20th century, as
[Amit Varma]: you describe in your book.
[Amit Varma]: And now it means different things in different parts of the world.
[Amit Varma]: So especially in America, where, you know, it means almost the opposite of what it used
[Amit Varma]: to.
[Amit Varma]: And old school liberals like us are called classical liberals by some, libertarians
[Amit Varma]: by others.
[Amit Varma]: It's all really fundamentally the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: It's really simple.
[Amit Varma]: It goes down to the principle of like, you know, as you say in your book, the essence
[Amit Varma]: of this is something you learn in kindergarten.
[Amit Varma]: Don't hit other people, don't take their stuff and keep your promises.
[Amit Varma]: Just sort of talking about how sort of liberty began to assert itself against power, as it
[Amit Varma]: were, in this sort of long battle.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, the key point is the enlightenment.
[Amit Varma]: So take me through a little bit of the early history of liberalism slash libertarianism
[Amit Varma]: and why John Locke is so important there.
[Amit Varma]: And what are the ideas that came out of that?
[Guest]: Like I say, in the Western world, there was for 1500 years or so a dominant Catholic church.
[Guest]: There were also princes and kings around Europe, and both parties had an interest in essentially
[Guest]: keeping things the same.
[Guest]: The kings want to know that their sons and grandsons will also be kings.
[Guest]: And that necessarily implies that the sons and grandsons of the serfs and the peasants
[Guest]: will remain in their state.
[Guest]: And the church at that time was not very open to scientific thinking that might challenge
[Guest]: the central role of religion in the world. Sometime around 1500, really, people started
[Guest]: thinking scientifically.
[Guest]: They started using their reason to try to understand the world.
[Guest]: And you get people like Galileo and Vesalius and Copernicus and Newton taking a genuinely
[Guest]: new scientific approach to understanding how our bodies work, how nature works, how the
[Guest]: heavens work, how the bodies in the universe work.
[Guest]: And this was a new thing.
[Guest]: This was the application of reason to understanding the world around us.
[Guest]: And as people started doing that, it led them to some extent to question the rules that
[Guest]: authorities had set up for the world.
[Guest]: So, Steven Pinker in his new book, Enlightenment Now, which I think you've talked about on
[Guest]: here, identifies four elements of the Enlightenment, reason, science, humanism, and progress.
[Guest]: Reason, the use of the human capacity to understand and analyze.
[Guest]: Science, the application of reason to the natural world.
[Guest]: Humanism, the idea that human institutions should be judged by how well they serve humanity.
[Guest]: And then progress, the idea that things actually can change.
[Guest]: They can get better.
[Guest]: We can discover how the body works and use that to save lives.
[Guest]: We can discover how nature works and harness it to provide us eventually with running water
[Guest]: and electricity and all those kinds of things.
[Guest]: And we can come to understand how commerce makes people treat one another better.
[Guest]: Sort of an old idea, you know, two ways of acquiring wealth.
[Guest]: You can either take it from people or you can trade something for it.
[Guest]: And in the Enlightenment liberal era, people started examining the way that trade was done.
[Guest]: They started examining the way that trading is better in terms of social peace and actual
[Guest]: economic growth, and also noticed that people who come to each other as traders tend to
[Guest]: treat each other better.
[Guest]: I've seen some scholars talk about the double thank you.
[Guest]: When I buy something, I say thank you to the clerk and he says thank you to me.
[Guest]: Because in that transaction, we've both been made better off.
[Guest]: He now has money to buy whatever he needs.
[Guest]: So this was the Enlightenment, the understanding that we could seek to understand and we could
[Guest]: anticipate progress.
[Guest]: And then I think it's in that era that people start thinking about political institutions.
[Guest]: What is the nature of man and what political institutions would best serve man?
[Guest]: And that's where John Locke comes in.
[Guest]: About 1690, publishes his second treatise of government.
[Guest]: And it says, what is the point of government?
[Guest]: Governments are created to protect our rights, our rights of life, liberty, and property.
[Guest]: And we could try to protect them ourselves with sticks or guns or whatever we have.
[Guest]: But there are certainly some good reasons to prefer that we create an organization that
[Guest]: will protect all of our rights and hopefully do so in a peaceful way.
[Guest]: So government is created to protect individual rights and to protect private property.
[Guest]: And if government is not serving those purposes, as we said in the Declaration of Independence,
[Guest]: it is the right of the people to alter or abolish it.
[Guest]: And then from John Locke's work on individual rights and the nature of government and Adam
[Guest]: Smith's work on spontaneous order and economics, we get really the whole flourishing of liberal
[Guest]: thought, now maybe known as libertarian thought, and also the flourishing of the world from
[Guest]: a world of backbreaking poverty and short life expectancies up until about 1700 and
[Guest]: the incredible progress of technology and economics and society since then.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason this happens, obviously, is that once people have the freedom, so to say,
[Amit Varma]: to associate with others in whatever way they want, consenting adults can do whatever they
[Amit Varma]: want with each other, whether in the bedroom or in the marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: And that leads to a positive some game like you described it, I think it's John Stossel's
[Amit Varma]: phrase, a double thank you moment, where both parties trading get better off and the amount
[Amit Varma]: of value in the world grows up, which is really the secret of all human success.
[Amit Varma]: But sort of going back to Locke, I'll just quote another bit from your book where you
[Amit Varma]: cite Locke, start quote, people have rights prior to the existence of government.
[Amit Varma]: Thus, we call them natural rights because they exist in nature.
[Amit Varma]: People form a government to protect their rights.
[Amit Varma]: They could do that without government, but a government is an efficient system for protecting
[Amit Varma]: rights.
[Amit Varma]: And if government exceeds that role, people are justified in revolting.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, just unpack this a little bit for me.
[Amit Varma]: What what did Locke mean by natural rights per se?
[Amit Varma]: And also one insight, as you point out in your book, and we can talk about that later,
[Amit Varma]: is that even for those who don't believe in anything called natural rights, that rights
[Amit Varma]: cannot be natural, it would still benefit all of us the most if we proceeded on the
[Amit Varma]: assumption that we begin with the right to self-ownership, which is at the heart of Locke's
[Amit Varma]: thinking.
[Guest]: Yes, well, that's right.
[Guest]: So philosophers have been arguing ever since Locke about what rights are and whether they
[Guest]: can actually be justified.
[Guest]: But Locke's argument was that we have rights inherent in the nature of man as a being capable
[Guest]: of reason.
[Guest]: And so these rights are natural.
[Guest]: We often say in the United States, the Constitution gives me the right to do that.
[Guest]: Well, no, we really should say the Constitution protects my right to do that.
[Guest]: I have a right to think the way I want to, to marry who I want to, to travel where I
[Guest]: want to.
[Guest]: The Constitution protects those rights.
[Guest]: And so the rights are natural or unalienable, as we said in the Declaration of Independence.
[Guest]: And once we understand that, then we see the need for an agency to protect those rights
[Guest]: from threats from other people.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And what's happened in sort of modern times is that like all these terms get muddied,
[Amit Varma]: the term rights has also gotten muddied in the sense that we have what I would rather
[Amit Varma]: call entitlements, which aren't rights at all, also being spoken of as rights, for example,
[Amit Varma]: the right to food, the right to livelihood, the right to broadband.
[Amit Varma]: And so on, which are really positive rights.
[Amit Varma]: Can you just sort of explain the difference between negative rights and positive rights
[Amit Varma]: and how they muddy these waters?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: Negative rights means that I have a right to take action, to live as I choose without
[Guest]: interference by others.
[Guest]: So in that sense, you know, it is a negative on your ability to coerce me.
[Guest]: Positive right means that I have a right to be given something by some agency, from you,
[Guest]: from the government, from some human source.
[Guest]: And the important point, I think, is that negative rights can be enjoyed by everyone
[Guest]: in every society, no matter how poor the society is.
[Guest]: We can all agree that we will not hit each other or take each other's stuff.
[Guest]: We can agree that people can say whatever they want to and they will not be arrested
[Guest]: or executed for it.
[Guest]: We can agree that people can grow food on their own property and they can either eat
[Guest]: it or exchange it with other people.
[Guest]: When you start talking about positive rights, like the right to food or shelter, the right
[Guest]: to a college education, the right to have your children taken care of at government
[Guest]: expense, all of those things require someone else to provide this benefit to you.
[Guest]: And because of that, they require infringing on your negative rights.
[Guest]: When somebody says, I have a right to 12 years of education at public expense, which
[Guest]: is what they always mean, then that means they have the power to tax me to educate their
[Guest]: children for 12 years.
[Guest]: Now, the argument is, well, it's all for all.
[Guest]: We're all in this together.
[Guest]: But of course, we all have different views about what kind of education is appropriate,
[Guest]: what kind of health care, how we want to spend our money.
[Guest]: When you tax me, you don't know exactly what cost you might be imposing on me.
[Guest]: So negative rights can be enjoyed by everyone without infringing on other people.
[Guest]: Positive rights can only be enjoyed at the expense of other people.
[Guest]: And so one obvious point about positive rights is if you have a poor society, you simply
[Guest]: can't have all these positive rights.
[Guest]: And therefore, as an amateur philosopher, I would say, well, then they're not right.
[Guest]: They may be entitlements.
[Guest]: They may be things you think are a good idea when we get wealthy.
[Guest]: But if you had tried to guarantee a right to food or a right to six years of education
[Guest]: in the United States very early on, we just didn't have the money.
[Guest]: India 50 years ago didn't have the money to do those things.
[Guest]: Even today, the United States may not have the money to provide all the things that Bernie
[Guest]: Sanders and other Democratic socialists want.
[Guest]: And of course, when you try to supply all those things by government, you usually get
[Guest]: less economic growth, therefore lower wages, less efficient economies, less useful services
[Guest]: being provided, and sometimes much worse than that.
[Amit Varma]: And I should really clarify on both our behalves.
[Amit Varma]: Like when I talk about the difference between negative and positive rights, you know, especially
[Amit Varma]: in India, people look at me and ask, how can you say, you know, there's no right to food
[Amit Varma]: or water and these are just basic things.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd like to point out that these are very desirable to say that they are not rights
[Amit Varma]: is not to say that people should go hungry, or people should not be educated.
[Amit Varma]: It's just to point out that if you want the state to provide for that, it comes at a cost,
[Amit Varma]: it comes at a moral cost, obviously, of the violence that they're inflicting on other
[Amit Varma]: citizens.
[Amit Varma]: And it also comes at a cost to recipients themselves, because there's always a trade
[Amit Varma]: off between this kind of distribution and growth.
[Amit Varma]: And only growth lifts people out of poverty.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, there are better ways to achieve all of these things without necessarily using
[Amit Varma]: coercive means.
[Amit Varma]: And this, you know, often kind of gets lost in translation while talking about rights.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, obviously, for a poor country, there are difficult questions that this brings
[Amit Varma]: up.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll come to them a little later on, because I have a bunch of difficult questions
[Amit Varma]: that libertarians should confront and answer.
[Amit Varma]: So kind of, you know, again, moving on from Locke to, you know, the right to self ownership,
[Amit Varma]: where his heart of the heart of his argument is that, look, you know, who owns us, you
[Amit Varma]: know, it cannot be that everybody owns everybody that doesn't work, it cannot be that some
[Amit Varma]: tyrant owns you, because, you know, where does that come from?
[Amit Varma]: So it is natural and almost self evident to say that we own ourselves and that self ownership.
[Amit Varma]: And from that, you get the right to life and liberty, you get the right to free speech.
[Amit Varma]: And interestingly, and what I want to ask you about is the right to property.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is the right to property is something that is under dispute from essentially all
[Amit Varma]: of these other philosophies of thinking, whether it's socialism or fascism or economic nationalism
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, all of them, in some senses, attack the right to property and behave almost
[Amit Varma]: as if there is something fundamentally immoral about this.
[Amit Varma]: Can you unpack that for me?
[Guest]: Yes, they all do.
[Guest]: On the other hand, the right to property, the feeling that this thing I have worked
[Guest]: for or this thing I have created is mine, I think is pretty natural to human beings.
[Guest]: I don't think it's just in America.
[Guest]: I think everywhere in the world, people feel that something I've created or land that
[Guest]: I've worked.
[Guest]: And that's what Locke said was that by mixing your labor with land that was formerly unowned,
[Guest]: you make it yours.
[Guest]: Now, a whole body of property law arises from that so that people now own land that they
[Guest]: themselves have not worked.
[Guest]: They may be renting it out to other people and so on.
[Guest]: But it's come through a process of, at least in theory, originally, somebody mixed his
[Guest]: labor with the land and acquired it that way and then was able, through a series of contracts,
[Guest]: to transfer it to his children, to people to whom he sold it or rented it and so on.
[Guest]: Societies that have actually tried to abolish the right of property have turned into disasters.
[Guest]: The best example would be the Soviet Union after the 1917 Revolution.
[Guest]: They were really dedicated communists.
[Guest]: They really did believe from each according to his ability to each according to his needs,
[Guest]: abolish property, abolish money.
[Guest]: And it was an immediate disaster.
[Guest]: We look at the pictures of Venezuela and we think how horrible that is.
[Guest]: That sort of collapse happened in very short order in the Soviet Union from 1917 to 1921.
[Guest]: And historians now call it war communism to blame it on the war.
[Guest]: But what it was, was the best attempt ever to actually implement communism, a system
[Guest]: of true public ownership of all the property in society and distribution of resources on
[Guest]: the basis of need and not on the basis of money.
[Guest]: And it was such a disaster that Lenin created the new economic policy, which essentially
[Guest]: created a sort of extremely stunted and interventionist market economy.
[Guest]: Because if you don't say this house is yours, this factory belongs, this factory is under
[Guest]: the authority of someone who can make decisions about it, then you get total collapse of the
[Guest]: economy the way they did in 1920, 21.
[Guest]: So there are a lot of ideologies that do not believe in an absolute right to poverty.
[Guest]: Most of them don't deny the efficacy of private property ownership.
[Guest]: They just don't think it can be that it should be absolute because there are higher causes,
[Guest]: whether that is allocating resources to our ethnic or religious group or indeed allocating
[Guest]: resources simply to the needs of the nobles or the monarchs or the parliament or the ruling
[Guest]: class.
[Guest]: We have to make those kinds of exceptions.
[Guest]: The countries that have been most successful have been those that have been best at protecting
[Guest]: property rights of each individual, of each corporate entity, and not severely interfering
[Guest]: with them through government interactions.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, as you point out in your book, this is not just taking on from sort of a
[Amit Varma]: logical continuation of the right to self-ownership and therefore almost a normative moral point
[Amit Varma]: as it were.
[Amit Varma]: But it's also for practical reasons that you need the right to property.
[Amit Varma]: As you say in your book, quote, if our world were not characterized by scarcity, we wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: need property rights.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I had an episode on the right to property about how it's been eroded in
[Amit Varma]: India, like it started off as one of our fundamental rights and now it no longer is.
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode on that with the economist Shruti Rajagopalan where she elaborated on
[Amit Varma]: this much more.
[Amit Varma]: But another thing that, you know, not having a strong right to property does is it affects
[Amit Varma]: incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll just tell you a quick story about something that a friend of mine worked on.
[Amit Varma]: There's a friend of mine called Barun Mitra, a writer in Delhi, who campaigned for many
[Amit Varma]: years to get a group of tribals property rights on land that they'd been occupying for generations.
[Amit Varma]: I think it was in the state of Gujarat with other activists.
[Amit Varma]: And finally, it came through and very innovatively using technology, using GPS data over a period
[Amit Varma]: of years, they managed to prove that this land was indeed theirs and they got the land
[Amit Varma]: rights. And the first thing they did when they got legal title was they built toilets
[Amit Varma]: in their houses.
[Amit Varma]: And that to me is just so revelatory of the power of the incentive of property rights
[Amit Varma]: that the moment people actually own property, you have private ownership, the incentives
[Amit Varma]: change, they look after that property so much better.
[Amit Varma]: And you can just see the difference between private and public property pretty much everywhere.
[Guest]: Yes, you absolutely can.
[Guest]: You know, there's a saying in the United States, nobody ever washes a rented car.
[Guest]: You wash your own car.
[Guest]: You want to keep up the value of your car, but you don't have much incentive to wash
[Guest]: a car you're just renting for a few days.
[Guest]: That's that's the problem of the owner.
[Guest]: And the same thing is true with publicly owned housing.
[Guest]: It tends to deteriorate because there's no owner there who cares that when a window is
[Guest]: broken or a window sill is cracked, that you need to fix that.
[Guest]: And it's true even just with renters of housing.
[Guest]: If I'm renting an apartment, I care how good it is to live in, but its long term value
[Guest]: is of less interest to me.
[Guest]: So keeping up the maintenance, painting when appropriate, patching holes, all those things
[Guest]: I'm going to be less careful about than I would be if I owned it.
[Guest]: And of course, people who are renting out their property develop ways to take care of
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: They have security deposits.
[Guest]: They have they check in sometimes.
[Guest]: They make sure the the renter knows that you can call me if there's a problem because I
[Guest]: will want to fix it, all that sort of thing.
[Guest]: But it's absolutely true that if you take away the ownership incentive, people have
[Guest]: much less reason to make their property well maintained, long lasting and productive.
[Guest]: The fact that I am able to reap the benefits of whatever I plant on my property makes me
[Guest]: want to do that.
[Guest]: If I am allowed to plant corn on a piece of land, but I don't actually own the land, then
[Guest]: I'm not going to build a house for myself.
[Guest]: I will build a house when I know that I have secure property rights or secure rental rights.
[Guest]: If I'm confident that I live in a society with the rule of law and I've rented this
[Guest]: property for 20 years, then maybe I build a house.
[Guest]: Property rights create the incentive to maintain property.
[Guest]: And one of the points there, you know, from a sort of environmentalist or sustainable
[Guest]: development point, is it's ownership that makes people look at the long term.
[Guest]: Because I figure someday I'm going to sell this property or maybe I'm going to leave
[Guest]: it to my son or daughter.
[Guest]: But either way, I have a long term interest in maintaining the quality of the property,
[Guest]: whether that's a house or a field or a forest or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, moving on from sort of the moral case for libertarianism, for respecting
[Amit Varma]: individual freedom, which is that which comes from self ownership, we all own ourselves
[Amit Varma]: for the right to life and liberty and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: There's also a consequentialist case which simply argues that, listen, forget natural
[Amit Varma]: rights, it doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: If you want society to grow and to prosper, then you need individual freedom.
[Amit Varma]: Expand on that a little bit.
[Amit Varma]: What evidence we have to show that freedom really benefits the world at large?
[Guest]: Well, that's right.
[Guest]: So my own view is basically I agree with the Declaration of Independence.
[Guest]: All men are endowed by their creator or by nature with certain inalienable rights.
[Guest]: And that is a self evident truth.
[Guest]: I believe that it is wrong to use force against other people, except defensively.
[Guest]: So if you're pointing a gun at me, I have a right to defend myself.
[Guest]: But otherwise, I should not be the one to pick up a stick or a gun and try to take something
[Guest]: of yours or impose my will on you.
[Guest]: And to me, that is self evident.
[Guest]: And I think to most people, even if they can't develop a theory of individual rights, they
[Guest]: know it's wrong to pick up a gun or a stick and force people to act in a way they wouldn't
[Guest]: want to.
[Guest]: So that is the self evident case for individual rights.
[Guest]: But it is also true.
[Guest]: And, you know, I work at a policy institute.
[Guest]: So what we make are consequentialist arguments all the time.
[Guest]: Set aside whether it is, in fact, a whether we are endowed by our creator with certain
[Guest]: inalienable rights.
[Guest]: Let's just say we want to live in a society that is peaceful and prosperous and harmonious.
[Guest]: How do we make that happen?
[Guest]: Well, it seems clear we do need to respect people's individual choices, whether or not
[Guest]: you think it's a right.
[Guest]: Respecting people's choices allows them to advance their own interests in a way that
[Guest]: doesn't harm other people.
[Guest]: Allowing private property means that people have an incentive to use their property to
[Guest]: create wealth.
[Guest]: Allowing market exchanges means that people have an incentive to think of how they can
[Guest]: serve others.
[Guest]: You know, we we do talk about libertarianism in terms of individualism and individual rights.
[Guest]: But really, it's a system that enables cooperation.
[Guest]: And we libertarians believe in cooperation so strongly that we want social institutions
[Guest]: that enable it and social institutions like private property.
[Guest]: I know what is mine.
[Guest]: I know what is yours.
[Guest]: Market exchange.
[Guest]: I can exchange some of what I have for some of what you have.
[Guest]: The rule of law, sound money.
[Guest]: The fact that I know if I sell this to you for ten dollars, that ten dollars will be
[Guest]: worth it.
[Guest]: Ten dollars will be worth just as much a year from now, ten years from now.
[Guest]: The sounder the money is, the easier it is to make economic transactions.
[Guest]: So all the benefits that we see from economic growth rest on the idea that people own things,
[Guest]: other people own other things, and we're all allowed to make exchanges and contracts with
[Guest]: each other in order to achieve mutually beneficial improvements in our situation.
[Guest]: And you take each one of those improvements and you add up hundreds of millions of those
[Guest]: improvements and you get economic growth.
[Guest]: You move from the quality of life in 1900 to the quality of life in 2000.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the things that's always baffled me is that it's fairly evident that
[Amit Varma]: you know, all of political philosophy is really this tussle between liberty and power.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you'd imagine the political spectrum to split up like that, where you
[Amit Varma]: have extreme liberty, you have complete liberty on one side and, you know, statism and power
[Amit Varma]: on the other side.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not how it's split up.
[Amit Varma]: For example, one of the things that baffles me is that, look, almost everybody will agree
[Amit Varma]: that it is okay for two consenting adults to do whatever they want with each other as
[Amit Varma]: long as they're not infringing someone else's rights.
[Amit Varma]: But people will have different approaches to whether that happens in a bedroom or whether
[Amit Varma]: it happens in the marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: There'll be one group of people who will say that no, personal freedoms are sacrosanct,
[Amit Varma]: but hey, when it comes to the marketplace, the principle suddenly changes and the state
[Amit Varma]: must intervene.
[Amit Varma]: And there'll be other groups of people who will kind of look at it differently and want
[Amit Varma]: economic freedom in the marketplace, but they will want to clamp down on personal freedoms.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and this dissonance is what causes people to say that, hey, I'm socially liberal
[Amit Varma]: and fiscally conservative, you know, which kind of baffles me.
[Amit Varma]: How has the spectrum divvied up like this?
[Guest]: Well, one of the problems is that when you state libertarian principles in their broadest
[Guest]: form, like everybody should have the right to live their life as they choose, make the
[Guest]: decisions they want so long as they don't interfere with the rights of others.
[Guest]: Everybody agrees with that.
[Guest]: And then you're right.
[Guest]: People have different views of, oh, but I didn't mean that.
[Guest]: No, no, that's against God's will or that's not helping the poor, not helping the marginalized
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: So they divide into different groups on the basis of which ways they want to violate individual
[Guest]: rights, that they think that should override that.
[Guest]: Why have they divided this particular way?
[Guest]: That's an interesting question.
[Guest]: I don't know that it's true all over the world, and it hasn't always been true.
[Guest]: Obviously, there was a time when, at least in European history, you had the old regime
[Guest]: of monarchy and nobility and the established church.
[Guest]: And then you had liberalism, which argued for the rights of individuals and the rights
[Guest]: of markets and contracts, right to make contracts.
[Guest]: And so there you did have liberalism versus statism.
[Guest]: One argument is that as liberalism got rolling, this new idea of socialism came into existence.
[Guest]: And socialism wanted to achieve the goals of liberalism, widespread prosperity.
[Guest]: But it did it with, in a sense, old-fashioned authoritarian methods, the kind of methods
[Guest]: the kings and queens had used to take people's property, redistribute it, reassign it, forbid
[Guest]: people to do things that violated some rule or somebody's idea of what should be a social
[Guest]: norm.
[Guest]: And as liberalism basically eradicated the old order so that in the Western world, we
[Guest]: just don't have kings and queens with power anymore, the people who might otherwise have
[Guest]: been defenders of the old order, the kings and the nobles, became conservatives who preferred
[Guest]: the system of liberal markets to socialism.
[Guest]: And so then you got a world where it was sort of market liberalism against socialism, which
[Guest]: still claimed to support liberal values of individual rights and seeking prosperity.
[Guest]: And people who were more moderate socialists then continued to believe mostly in freedom
[Guest]: of speech and rights for minorities and those kinds of things.
[Guest]: But they didn't believe very strongly in rights of private property and free enterprise.
[Guest]: So I think at least in England and the United States and maybe the rest of Europe, that's
[Guest]: part of the division that was happening.
[Guest]: I've heard people say that one of the reasons for the differences you're talking about is
[Guest]: that people want to regulate or outlaw the impulses that they fear in themselves.
[Guest]: And that if people are perhaps particularly drawn to sexual activities that they fear
[Guest]: may actually be wrong, or they're drawn to look at pornography or to use mind-altering
[Guest]: substances like alcohol or marijuana, that's what they want to outlaw.
[Guest]: So they want to outlaw homosexuality or adultery.
[Guest]: They want to outlaw marijuana.
[Guest]: Sometimes they want to outlaw alcohol.
[Guest]: And alternatively, if what you fear in yourself is greed and you fear that you just know that
[Guest]: if you had the opportunity, you would cheat people, then you want a big government structure
[Guest]: to prevent people from being greedy and cheating others.
[Guest]: I've also heard the theory that actually a friend of mine made that argument once.
[Guest]: And I said, so then what do libertarians fear?
[Guest]: And he said, they fear the will to power.
[Guest]: They feel in themselves a will to power.
[Guest]: They know it's wrong, and therefore they want to control power.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I don't feel like I feel a will to power.
[Guest]: But there could be something to that.
[Guest]: At any rate, there are many arguments for infringing on other people's liberty.
[Guest]: They usually go back to something that you personally find morally offensive, whether
[Guest]: it's smoking marijuana or paying someone less than the minimum wage.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I certainly don't feel the will to power either, though I do feel a will to
[Amit Varma]: be just left alone.
[Amit Varma]: There's a great quote by you in your book again, which really sums it up really nicely.
[Amit Varma]: And I like quoting this to people, which is quote, conservatives want to be your daddy
[Amit Varma]: telling you what to do and what not to do.
[Amit Varma]: Liberals want to be your mommy feeding you, tucking you in and wiping your nose.
[Amit Varma]: Libertarians want to treat you as an adult.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I think the problem, at least sitting where I am in India, where, of course,
[Amit Varma]: I am probably one of about three or four libertarians in the whole country.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem here is that both sides of our political spectrum, such as it is, want
[Amit Varma]: to be both your daddy and your mommy to differing extents.
[Amit Varma]: There's just no respect for individual freedom or rights or even what it entails.
[Amit Varma]: It's not even part of the discourse.
[Amit Varma]: So we're going to take a quick commercial break and then we are going to come back to
[Amit Varma]: get deeper into the mechanics of how freedom works.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Unknown]: Hello, everybody.
[Unknown]: Welcome to another great week on the IBM.
[Unknown]: I'm your host, Rani.
[Unknown]: I'm your host, Ashish.
[Unknown]: And welcome to another great week on the IBM Podcast Network.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM Podcasts on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: This is a really exciting week.
[Unknown]: We've got two really big shows releasing this week.
[Unknown]: The first show is Dreaming With Your Eyes Open with Rani Skruvala.
[Unknown]: This is a companion podcast to Rani's bestselling book, Dream With Your Eyes Open.
[Unknown]: On this podcast, Rani shares his vast entrepreneurial experience and takeaways from each chapter
[Unknown]: with me.
[Unknown]: New episodes will be out every Tuesday.
[Unknown]: And also don't forget to listen to the audiobook.
[Unknown]: You'll find it wherever you look for it.
[Unknown]: The second show that we're really excited about is called The Note with famous journalist
[Unknown]: and news editor, Maru Kinnayan.
[Unknown]: She cuts the clutter and analyzes the stories that matter to you.
[Unknown]: Join her on the podcast where she gives you pure analysis on what's happening around you.
[Unknown]: This week, she has a three-part exclusive series about the Indian elections.
[Unknown]: Speaking of the Indian elections, also check out the latest episode of Thale Harate, Simplified,
[Unknown]: Gana Tantra, The Seen and the Unseen, Election Soundtrack, and Cyrus Says is Cock and Bull
[Unknown]: for our thoughts on the elections.
[Unknown]: This week on Cyrus Says, Cyrus is joined by millennial businesswoman Natasha Malpani-Oswald.
[Unknown]: She talks about her education in Oxford, Stanford, and Cambridge, returning to Mumbai to head
[Unknown]: Dice Media, and recites poetry from her book, Boundless.
[Unknown]: On the Sponge Podcast, Amit Parmesh Varun discusses how leaders become great with characteristics
[Unknown]: of humility and humbleness.
[Unknown]: On States of Anarchy, Hamsani is in conversation with Professor Felix Pecking to discuss tariffs
[Unknown]: in Chinese history and how it's employed in today's context of trade wars.
[Unknown]: On Advertising is Dead, Varun is joined by Pradesh Varun, co-founder of Chatterbox.
[Unknown]: They talk about influencer marketing, the Fyre Festival fiasco, and a whole lot more.
[Unknown]: On Gol Gappa, Tripti is joined by IVM co-founder Kavita Rajwade, as she talks about her personal
[Unknown]: and professional journey and how the concept of a Marathi podcast came into being.
[Unknown]: On Thale Harate, we have an election special where Pawan and Ganesh talk to Raghavendra
[Unknown]: HS about the hows and whys of voting.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you on with your shows.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with David Bose about libertarianism.
[Amit Varma]: So, David, so far, we've kind of spoken about how, you know, liberty started asserting itself
[Amit Varma]: in this battle against power, so to say, in the Western world, starting with the Enlightenment
[Amit Varma]: and John Locke's ideas.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you've taken us through the natural rights argument and the consequentialist
[Amit Varma]: argument, which, you know, to my mind, just speaks for itself.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, look at this world over the last 200 years.
[Amit Varma]: That's a series of voluntary exchanges and the positive some game playing itself out.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of, you know, you've outlined a bunch of ideas as key concepts of libertarianism
[Amit Varma]: in your book.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to quickly go through them one by one, because they're both quite insightful.
[Amit Varma]: And also to someone who is completely unfamiliar with liberalism or libertarianism, they might
[Amit Varma]: even be surprising because the first of them is individualism.
[Amit Varma]: And you say, quote, for libertarians, a basic unit of social analysis is an individual,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And individualism gets a bad rap nowadays, right?
[Amit Varma]: People say, oh, individualism means, you know, your atomism and, you know, no respect for
[Amit Varma]: society.
[Guest]: And that's not the kind of world we want to live in.
[Guest]: Yes, people do make those kinds of criticism.
[Guest]: That's the standard criticism of liberty and individual rights is individualism, excessive
[Guest]: individualism, egoism.
[Guest]: You're only concerned about yourself.
[Guest]: Well, as I mentioned earlier, one of the things that happens in a market economy is if I'm
[Guest]: concerned about making money to improve the lives of myself and my family, I have to think
[Guest]: about what can I do that people will pay me for.
[Guest]: So whether that's shining shoes or manufacturing shoes or designing insurance products, I am
[Guest]: thinking each day, what will people pay me to do?
[Guest]: So in that sense, the market economy is the most socially beneficial institution that's
[Guest]: ever been created.
[Guest]: It requires people to think about how they can serve others, not coercively.
[Guest]: But as Adam Smith said, the baker's regard to his self-interest is what causes him to
[Guest]: get up at 4 a.m. and bake bread before people are out shopping for their breakfast.
[Guest]: So individualism gets a bad rap that way.
[Guest]: I think also as a teacher, as a preacher, as a theologian or a philosopher, you're going
[Guest]: to say there are ways to get lead a good life.
[Guest]: And one of the ways to do that is prudence and balance.
[Guest]: It isn't necessarily a good thing to make making money the most important or the only
[Guest]: important thing in your life.
[Guest]: You may find that your life will be better served if you have a faith community, if you
[Guest]: have a family, if you have friends and neighbors.
[Guest]: But people have different preferences for all of those things.
[Guest]: And what I always figure is if there are people who are just out to make as much money as
[Guest]: they can, that might not be the best life for them, but they're serving me because they're
[Guest]: staying up all night creating Microsoft or iPhones or financial products that allow me
[Guest]: to save for retirement.
[Guest]: I can just put my money every month in a basic index fund and feel fairly confident that
[Guest]: I'm saving for my retirement.
[Guest]: But somebody had to create the companies and somebody had to create the idea of an index
[Guest]: fund and so on and so on.
[Guest]: And so in that sense, those people may not actually be living their best life, but they
[Guest]: are serving other people by creating these things that improve our lives.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one enormously counterintuitive insight is that self-interest for all the bad rap
[Amit Varma]: that it gets is in practice the best form of altruism.
[Amit Varma]: Like our first Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru didn't like the profit motive very much when
[Amit Varma]: speaking to the industrialist JRD Tata.
[Amit Varma]: He once said, quote, do not speak to me of profit.
[Amit Varma]: It is a dirty word.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And the point I often keep making is that profit is the best form of philanthropy because
[Amit Varma]: there is only one way to make a profit.
[Amit Varma]: You make somebody else's life better off.
[Amit Varma]: That's the whole nature of the double thank you moment.
[Amit Varma]: And if we all are consider nothing but profit on how we can make our own lives better off,
[Amit Varma]: and we do that in legitimate ways, which is profit seeking and not using the power of
[Amit Varma]: the state or rent seeking, which is a subject I'll come to later.
[Guest]: But that's right.
[Guest]: All of this is true.
[Guest]: As long as we understand that we are doing it peacefully within the rule of law, people
[Guest]: who are so obsessed with accumulation of money or property that they will use a gun or the
[Guest]: power of government to make their profits are not socially beneficial and do deserve
[Guest]: criticism not for being ego is to excessive individualist, but for violating our rights.
[Guest]: But as long as we do it within the peaceful and lawful system, then every time we seek
[Guest]: a profit, it is because in order to seek a profit, we have to think about what other
[Amit Varma]: people would like to buy.
[Amit Varma]: And I have sort of a tangential thought here.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me what you think of it, which is that the nature of the state and the institutions
[Amit Varma]: that surround it also determine social attitudes.
[Amit Varma]: For example, it's a theory I've had that because the Indian state is so all encompassing and
[Amit Varma]: because the easiest way to make money is to use the coercive power of the state or become
[Amit Varma]: a part of it or use it in some way and it's through rent seeking and not profit seeking
[Amit Varma]: that the attitudes that have percolated down to society are attitudes of how do I exploit
[Amit Varma]: so and so person rather than how do I do something which will make his life better off and you
[Amit Varma]: know, make money in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: And if this is a commonplace social attitude, to some extent, it seems to me also the fault
[Amit Varma]: of the pervasive state and these sort of rent seeking institutions.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the easiest way to make money, honestly, is through rent seeking, though that has changed
[Amit Varma]: in the last 30 something years.
[Amit Varma]: But what do you feel about that?
[Guest]: Well, absolutely.
[Guest]: I think people get up every morning thinking, how can I make my life and my family's life
[Guest]: better than it was yesterday?
[Guest]: How can we have a better year than we did last year?
[Guest]: And if the easiest thing around is, well, first, if the easiest thing around is to pick
[Guest]: up a gun and rob a bank and know you'll get away with it, well, then too many people will
[Guest]: do that.
[Guest]: If the easiest thing is to go to government and get a tariff or a subsidy or a ban on
[Guest]: your competitors, then people will do that.
[Guest]: But those things are generally not available if the government is too small or sufficiently
[Guest]: uncorrupt that it won't do those things.
[Guest]: But we're not really talking about corruption.
[Guest]: We're talking about what's within the law.
[Guest]: If you know that your city government will not give you a subsidy to create a business
[Guest]: and will not pass a regulation to shut down your competitors, then you will have to turn
[Guest]: your attention to actually serving customers.
[Guest]: And of course, in a market society with a lot of businesses, most people's first thought
[Guest]: is how do I make a better product?
[Guest]: How do I sell it on a better corner, whatever, that will enable me to make money?
[Guest]: But if those governmental options are available, some people will notice them.
[Guest]: And I've written about this numerous times about companies, particularly in our tech
[Guest]: industry, which, as you may know, is mostly out west, 3,000 miles from Washington, D.C.
[Guest]: And I think those companies were out there tinkering in garages and coming up with great
[Guest]: ideas and building companies and ignoring the federal government.
[Guest]: And to some extent, it was when the federal government started impinging on them, creating
[Guest]: antitrust laws, restricting their ability to get employees from overseas, restricting
[Guest]: their ability to buy and sell overseas through tariffs.
[Guest]: They needed to get involved in Washington to stop those unfortunate policies.
[Guest]: And once you get into Washington, you can just get dragged into the rent-seeking economy
[Guest]: or what I call the parasite economy.
[Guest]: You move from being entirely focused on serving customers to partially focused on what can
[Guest]: I get the government to do that will hurt my competitor and make it easier for me to
[Guest]: sell my product.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, the way I've always thought of markets is markets are the most efficient
[Amit Varma]: instrument by which people in society can fulfill each other's needs.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, as you've pointed out in your book over a period of time, the term society has
[Amit Varma]: taken on a life of its own, where people actually think of society as a beast of its own, which
[Amit Varma]: is not, you know, like to us, society is just consisting of the individuals that compose
[Amit Varma]: it, nothing more and nothing less.
[Amit Varma]: But there are different philosophies and ways of thinking that treat it as something special
[Amit Varma]: and that behave as if the needs of society must be met by the state itself.
[Amit Varma]: And individuals voluntarily interacting among themselves are not capable of it.
[Guest]: Well, that's right, the great human beings are social animals, very few of us want to
[Guest]: get stranded on a desert island or go out into the wilderness and live alone.
[Guest]: We want to live in communities.
[Guest]: We want to interact with other people, partly for the internal fulfillment that we get,
[Guest]: but partly also because if you go off in the wilderness and live alone, you're going to
[Guest]: be lucky to have a lean-to and rabbit every three days to eat.
[Guest]: Whereas if you participate in society, you can have a varied diet and a pleasant home
[Guest]: and an easier job than trapping wild animals.
[Guest]: And it's the market institutions that make that kind of social cooperation possible.
[Guest]: So in that sense, libertarians are all for society.
[Guest]: In fact, there's an argument that libertarians should have been called socialists because
[Guest]: we are for social power, for social interaction, not for the state, not for physical power.
[Guest]: So really the two opposing philosophies are socialism and statism.
[Guest]: We reject statism as a way of organizing society.
[Guest]: We believe in social interaction.
[Guest]: But obviously the word socialist has come to mean something else, so we can't do that.
[Guest]: And we don't want to reify society, to make it a thing of which we are merely members.
[Guest]: We all interact with people in ways that mostly, as adults at least, we get to choose.
[Guest]: We can choose where we work.
[Guest]: We can choose where we live.
[Guest]: We can choose to have more or less relationship with our family, more or less involvement
[Guest]: in our neighborhoods.
[Guest]: And through those things, we create society.
[Guest]: But society is not an independent entity that should work with government to limit our freedom.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, there was a quote in your book from Hillary Clinton, which made me just laugh
[Amit Varma]: out loud.
[Amit Varma]: And I presume the quote is from the 90s when she wrote, It Takes a Village, etc.
[Amit Varma]: And the quote goes like this quote, Videos with scenes of common sense baby care, how
[Amit Varma]: to burp an infant, what to do when soap gets in his eyes, how to make a baby with an earache
[Amit Varma]: comfortable, could be running continuously on doctors offices, clinics, hospitals, motor
[Amit Varma]: vehicle offices, or any other place where people gather and have to wait.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I imagine this was her vision for how the you know, the state would disseminate
[Amit Varma]: all this information to poor ignorant citizens who need it.
[Amit Varma]: And I just thought of YouTube today that hey, we do that for ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if I'm stuck doing any normal errand or trying to figure out some piece of electronics,
[Amit Varma]: or if I just want to figure out a new way of frying an egg, for God's sake, I can just
[Amit Varma]: go on YouTube or search for it or Instagram and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And all of this is people disseminating knowledge to each other so beautifully.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, this is a market at work and contrast that with the clumsy, coercive approach
[Guest]: that you know, she laid out in her quote,
[Guest]: places where people have to wait, including government offices, where the where the people
[Guest]: running the offices don't care about the time of the people who are waiting.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: It was sort of a vision.
[Guest]: Talk about this.
[Guest]: You know, liberals want to be your mommy teaching you how to wipe your nose and running videos
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: I've never looked for a YouTube video on how to birth a baby, but I'll bet there is one.
[Guest]: In fact, there are probably many of them.
[Guest]: So we didn't need the government to do that.
[Guest]: And it did feel creepy.
[Guest]: It feels like 1984 that the government knows better than you do about everything.
[Guest]: And it will generously take your money and then produce videos telling you how to birth
[Amit Varma]: a baby.
[Amit Varma]: And that is so repugnant.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another great quote from your book, which I just want to read out because
[Amit Varma]: it's so reflective of the misconception that people have of individualism and society.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, like you said, humans are social animals.
[Amit Varma]: And the quote is quote, an individual is part of a family, a neighborhood, a city, a metropolitan
[Amit Varma]: area, a state, a nation.
[Amit Varma]: But are the circles merely concentric?
[Amit Varma]: A better way to understand community in the modern world is as a series of intersecting
[Amit Varma]: circles with myriad complex connections among them.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a beautiful quote.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, and the fact is that all of these circles are best organized and brought together
[Guest]: by voluntary action.
[Guest]: Yes, that's right.
[Guest]: And not everybody in my family is interested in the same activities that I am.
[Guest]: Not everybody in my family lives in the same neighborhood.
[Guest]: And you can sort of see in an earlier period when we lived in clans and villages, it sort
[Guest]: of was true that everyone in your family lives right around you and participates in the same
[Guest]: activities.
[Guest]: Everyone in your family lives in the same village.
[Guest]: Everyone in the village goes to the same church and so on and so on.
[Guest]: But in a plural society, a modern liberal society, I don't have to go to the same church
[Guest]: as my brothers and sisters.
[Guest]: I don't have to enjoy the same music that my parents do.
[Guest]: I can go to libertarian conventions and nobody else in my family does.
[Guest]: And a lot of the people in the libertarian conventions are listening to kinds of music
[Guest]: that I don't like, are following sports teams that I'm not interested in.
[Guest]: All kinds of.
[Guest]: And so in that sense, we're all forming many different connections with people.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the core values of libertarianism, as you point out, is pluralism.
[Amit Varma]: And you draw the distinction between moral pluralism versus perfection.
[Amit Varma]: And you point out that theocratic religions, Marxism, communitarian philosophers aim for
[Amit Varma]: perfection, to design a society according to the rules.
[Amit Varma]: But we libertarians think of society differently.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: We believe in moral pluralism.
[Guest]: We understand that moral pluralism exists and we're comfortable with that.
[Guest]: There are a lot of people historically, and maybe even some today, who believe that a
[Guest]: society works best if everybody does follow the same values, the same philosophy, particularly
[Guest]: the same religion.
[Guest]: A lot of people believe societies work best if everyone is of the same ethnic origin.
[Guest]: And that is a sort of pre-modern attitude that we're a clan in a village, in a community
[Guest]: of our ethnic group.
[Guest]: Whereas in a plural world, we understand that diversity has values, that we all have individual
[Guest]: interests that aren't necessarily the same as the people who are closest to us.
[Guest]: And we've learned that societies can work perfectly well when people have different
[Guest]: religions, different races, different moral values, as long as those moral values don't
[Guest]: involve being able to impose your values on other people.
[Guest]: Or at least we have social and political institutions that limit the ability of people to try to
[Guest]: impose their values on others.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also sort of where moral pluralism is different from moral relativism, say, because
[Amit Varma]: all of this is subject to the sanctity of individual rights.
[Amit Varma]: As long as you're not infringing on anyone's rights, you can do whatever.
[Guest]: Yes, that's right.
[Guest]: We do want a society where infringements of rights are punished.
[Guest]: And in general, that means there is a court system, a system of police.
[Guest]: If you do hit me or take my stuff, that there will be some response to that.
[Guest]: And that helps to create the rule of law where I can be reasonably secure in my person and
[Guest]: property as I go about my business.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go back to some of the key concepts of libertarianism that you were talking about.
[Amit Varma]: After individualism, you have individual rights, which we don't need to elaborate on.
[Amit Varma]: We've already spoken about it.
[Amit Varma]: And the third one you've listed down is spontaneous order.
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode with Matt Ridley on the evolution of everything where we talk about essentially
[Amit Varma]: spontaneous order and markets and language.
[Amit Varma]: That's the nature of nature in a manner of speaking.
[Amit Varma]: Yet, as you also point out, one of the ironic downsides to progress was that you suddenly
[Amit Varma]: had an outgrowth of engineers and planners who had the arrogance and the fatal conceit,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, to believe that just as they could design a machine or an assembly line, they
[Guest]: could also design society.
[Guest]: It's a natural instinct, because we all know that achieving some of our purposes requires
[Guest]: planning in order.
[Guest]: It may be as simple as setting a time that you get up, that you get your children up,
[Guest]: that you serve your children breakfast, that you get your children to the bus stop so they
[Guest]: can go to school.
[Guest]: That kind of planning creates order and creates benefits.
[Guest]: In order to organize a conference, you have to do a lot of planning.
[Guest]: To organize a business, you have to do even more planning.
[Guest]: And it requires rules and cooperation and so on.
[Guest]: What a lot of people, and maybe particularly intellectuals, don't understand is that the
[Guest]: biggest institutions in society are too complex to be planned.
[Guest]: We have air traffic control at every airport regulating when airplanes take off.
[Guest]: But it would be a much more complex thing to try to regulate all the movements of automobiles
[Guest]: in a metropolitan area.
[Guest]: There, we rely on a few simple rules.
[Guest]: There's a speed limit, stop at the red light, only turn right on red, you know, those kinds
[Guest]: of things.
[Guest]: And that creates a reasonable degree of order.
[Guest]: So sometimes businessmen and engineers who have been planning in their businesses assume
[Guest]: that the whole country would be better off if somebody was planning it.
[Guest]: And sometimes intellectuals who have no conception of business think planning is just a matter
[Guest]: of somebody issuing orders, and they believe that we could order the whole society.
[Guest]: Look how much inefficiency there is in the market.
[Guest]: Food gets wasted, clothing is produced that nobody actually wants.
[Guest]: There are some houses that are not occupied, and there are people who don't have houses.
[Guest]: Surely a plan could fix all this.
[Guest]: What they don't understand is that the most complex institutions in society have been
[Guest]: unplanned.
[Guest]: Language is an example.
[Guest]: Language evolves.
[Guest]: Nobody sat down and wrote the English language and then froze it in 1590 or 1780 or anything.
[Guest]: It evolves all the time.
[Guest]: Law is also a spontaneous order.
[Guest]: Law starts with your tree fell on my property.
[Guest]: Who's responsible for the damage?
[Guest]: And people went to others to settle their disputes.
[Guest]: Some of the people who were good at settling disputes became known as judges.
[Guest]: We built up this precedent, and eventually the government got involved and it started
[Guest]: codifying all of this and writing it down in laws.
[Guest]: But to the extent that the government is writing laws as opposed to simply codifying what these
[Guest]: decisions have amounted to, it's actually interfering in the spontaneous development
[Guest]: of law.
[Guest]: And then in the economy, the order emerges out of individual actions every day.
[Guest]: Every one of us gets up wanting to improve our own lives and our families' lives, and
[Guest]: we make choices.
[Guest]: We bake bread, we buy bread, we go to a job, we look for a new job, we go door to door
[Guest]: selling something, we manufacture things.
[Guest]: And the market system and the price system make all of those things work to create win-win
[Guest]: solutions across the whole society.
[Guest]: And if you try to plan that, you will, among other things, get a lot less output.
[Amit Varma]: No, and there's a great essay by Leonard Reed called I Pencil, which I'll link from the
[Amit Varma]: episode page, which really shows what a miraculous thing a pencil is and what it takes to produce
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, no government or committee would be able to do it, but the market miraculously
[Amit Varma]: does it in the same way as everyone in the housing colony where I live get the breakfast
[Amit Varma]: they want every morning.
[Amit Varma]: And yet if some one person was, or one committee was to plan and figure out everyone's needs
[Amit Varma]: and figure out supply and demand, it would never happen.
[Amit Varma]: You touched on law in this, and really your fourth key concept of libertarianism, which
[Amit Varma]: I want to talk about is the rule of law.
[Amit Varma]: And at one hand, obviously, you know, people who have a very simplistic notion of what
[Amit Varma]: libertarians want often say that, no, it'll just be anarchy if everyone's free to do whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And that's not the case.
[Amit Varma]: And one has to explain to them that no, we believe in the rule of law, very strongly
[Amit Varma]: you need a rule of law, but even within that, there are nuances as to what law really means
[Amit Varma]: and how it is different from edicts, as you point out in your book.
[Guest]: Well that's right.
[Guest]: And as I was saying, I think the origins of law were that people had conflicts.
[Guest]: And once they figured out that it was better to try to resolve them peacefully, then they
[Guest]: started developing precedents on who's responsible if my tree falls on your property and what
[Guest]: should happen if I can prove that you stole something of mine.
[Guest]: And so we developed institutions like police and courts, fines, imprisonment, but also
[Guest]: when we say the rule of law, we mean that the law is clear and available to all and
[Guest]: applies to every person equally.
[Guest]: And it's not arbitrary and it doesn't provide special rules for some classes of people,
[Guest]: some races of people, or some groups like the ruling class.
[Guest]: There's a lot of criticism in the United States today that president Trump is threatening
[Guest]: the rule of law.
[Guest]: This is true of many presidents up to a point.
[Guest]: But when we say rule of law in that case, what we mean is there are laws that are either
[Guest]: evolved by courts or written down by legislators, and they provide that everybody plays by the
[Guest]: same rules.
[Guest]: The tax rate is the same for everyone.
[Guest]: The contracts are enforced for everyone.
[Guest]: And when government decides to violate that by helping one company over another, by hurting
[Guest]: one industry rather than another, by handing out contracts to friends of the president
[Guest]: or the governor or the mayor, all of those things are violations of the rule of law.
[Guest]: The expectation that each one of us is equal in the eyes of the law and will be equally
[Guest]: treated by our government.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And the fact that we often treat the quote unquote laws that legislators put together
[Amit Varma]: as sacred is sometimes a problem because, you know, as Hayek would say, they're edicts
[Amit Varma]: rather than laws.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, like you say, that where they breach the principle of treating everyone
[Amit Varma]: equally, it becomes a problem.
[Amit Varma]: For example, I like to say that all government regulations, wherever the government regulates
[Amit Varma]: a free market, it's essentially a redistribution of wealth from the poor to the rich.
[Amit Varma]: You know, not the other way around, but from the poor to the rich, because they always
[Amit Varma]: hurt the people at large and they benefit specific interest groups.
[Amit Varma]: And it's no one's yet given me an example of a regulation on free markets, which don't
[Amit Varma]: do exactly this.
[Amit Varma]: And yet regulations grow and grow.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in your book, you write, quote, The total code of federal regulations is now
[Amit Varma]: over one hundred and seventy five thousand pages in two hundred and thirty eight volumes.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Are regulations law?
[Amit Varma]: Are they part of the rule of law?
[Guest]: Well, there may be some kinds of regulations that actually regulate the way we treat one
[Guest]: another.
[Guest]: Environmental regulations may require that externalities and public goods be taken into
[Guest]: account.
[Guest]: But on the whole, your discussion of regulation is right.
[Guest]: And what I noticed was you're correct to say regulations typically benefit the rich and
[Guest]: well connected.
[Guest]: And you said and yet they continue to increase.
[Guest]: Well, there's no paradox there.
[Guest]: They continue to increase because there are special interests that benefit from them.
[Guest]: That's why they want them.
[Guest]: So, yes, we are constantly fighting for the public interest against special interests
[Guest]: that want particular kinds of regulation.
[Guest]: I remember some years ago, a lot of people didn't like smoking in restaurants.
[Guest]: And one day, McDonald's, the biggest restaurant chain in America, announced that it would
[Guest]: no longer allow smoking in its restaurants and it wanted a law to ban smoking in all
[Guest]: fast food restaurants.
[Guest]: Well, why?
[Guest]: If you're going to eliminate smoking in your restaurant, why do you need a law that will
[Guest]: tell you that?
[Guest]: Well, I suspect what they worried about was that some people want to go to fast food restaurants
[Guest]: and smoke.
[Guest]: And so by creating a law, they would avoid giving an economic advantage to any of their
[Guest]: competitors in attracting the custom of smokers.
[Guest]: So many laws that seem to have a public interest basis are, in fact, benefiting some special
[Guest]: interests.
[Guest]: And that is a significant factor in their being passed.
[Amit Varma]: And that actually comes to the crux of one of the problems that we face, one of the sort
[Amit Varma]: of big obstacles in this liberty versus power battle, which is that, you know, as public
[Amit Varma]: choice theory points out, there is an interplay between money and power because people in
[Amit Varma]: government because government is not a monolithic benevolent beast which just does what it's
[Amit Varma]: supposed to.
[Amit Varma]: It consists of people who, just like people anywhere else, respond to incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And those incentives are tailored always towards maximizing their own power and their own budgets,
[Amit Varma]: which is why, you know, Jefferson, for example, famously said, quote, The natural progress
[Amit Varma]: of things is for liberty to yield and government to gain ground.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: It is grounds for despair.
[Guest]: Well, it is grounds for concern.
[Guest]: In some sense, it is the reality of the world.
[Guest]: It's the reality we have to deal with.
[Guest]: Compared to long ago, we have done a pretty good job of creating social institutions that
[Guest]: restrain rent seeking and special interest seeking and so on.
[Guest]: But we certainly haven't done a perfect job of it.
[Guest]: And as our societies get wealthier, there's a lot more wealth that could be redistributed.
[Guest]: So even though we're all richer than we used to be, there can be more redistribution because
[Guest]: there's so much money available.
[Guest]: So yes, it is a constant challenge.
[Guest]: And you can read public choice economics and come away despairing because it suggests that
[Guest]: principles and public interests are not very important and everybody is out to get something
[Guest]: from the government.
[Guest]: On the other hand, public choice economists have sometimes asked, why is there so little
[Guest]: rent seeking?
[Guest]: If you look at the amount of money that is spent to influence the federal budget, what
[Guest]: is it?
[Guest]: Five billion dollars spent on a presidential campaign, maybe that much more on congressional
[Guest]: campaigns.
[Guest]: Maybe there's five billion dollars a year spent on lobbying and activist organizations
[Guest]: and even think tanks.
[Guest]: That's still not very much compared to the four trillion dollar federal budget.
[Guest]: So it seems that we do have some institutional structures that make it difficult to get what
[Guest]: you want from government and still some social norms that there's a limit to how blatant
[Guest]: you can be in asking for help from the government.
[Guest]: Now part of what those social norms mean is that there's work for articulate people who
[Guest]: can come up with good public rationales for the thing I want to do just to hurt my competitors.
[Guest]: So you say, we don't want America to be at the mercy of foreign suppliers of important
[Guest]: goods.
[Guest]: What I really mean is my company producing military uniforms here in the United States
[Guest]: is not very cost efficient.
[Guest]: And I know that if we have free trade, we will buy military uniforms from China.
[Guest]: But I can say, oh, that's bad for our national security.
[Guest]: What if we got in a war?
[Guest]: Our soldiers would have to go naked because we can't import our uniforms anymore.
[Guest]: So that will persuade people.
[Guest]: Oh, yes, we should require that the military uniforms be made in the United States.
[Guest]: The reason that somebody wanted to do that was because they wanted to make a profit.
[Guest]: But they've paid articulate lawyers and advertising managers to come up with an argument that
[Guest]: sounds like it benefits the public.
[Guest]: Still in the modern Western economies, most resources are still allocated by the market,
[Guest]: by people's choices in the marketplace.
[Guest]: And that's why, despite the size of government, we do continue to be better off every year.
[Guest]: We have our houses are a little bigger.
[Guest]: Our houses are a little warmer.
[Guest]: We have iPhones instead of the old fashioned phone on the wall at home.
[Guest]: All those improvements keep happening because we have come up with institutions that constrain
[Guest]: the special interests, even though they don't eliminate them.
[Amit Varma]: I'd been a guest on an episode of another podcast called the Pragati Podcast, which
[Amit Varma]: dealt with the public choice theory, which will be linked from the episode page.
[Amit Varma]: But I'd like to share a very revelatory story about how the state never decreases in size
[Amit Varma]: or never seems to decrease in size with you and my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: Have you ever heard of an Indian government department called the CCA?
[Amit Varma]: No, I don't think so.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, you got to listen to this one.
[Amit Varma]: So and I got this from a book by Vivek Debroy to give credit where it's due.
[Amit Varma]: So in 1984, a government department in the government of Tamil Nadu, which is a South
[Amit Varma]: Indian state applied to higher up authorities for an increase in its budget.
[Amit Varma]: So the secretary on whose table this landed decided to investigate and find out what exactly
[Amit Varma]: the CCA was and what it did.
[Amit Varma]: And the story of it goes back to the Second World War and to Winston Churchill.
[Amit Varma]: So Churchill was a big fan of cigars and he got all his cigars from Cuba.
[Amit Varma]: And when the Second World War started, his supply of cigars dried up.
[Amit Varma]: So he went to what was then the second best, according to him, cigar manufacturer around
[Amit Varma]: or the best which was available to him, which was in a place near what was then Madras and
[Amit Varma]: is now Chennai in Tamil Nadu.
[Amit Varma]: So a government department was set up to procure those cigars for him, because India was still
[Amit Varma]: part of the British Empire then and send it to him over in London until the war got over.
[Amit Varma]: And that department was called CCA Churchill Cigar Assistant.
[Amit Varma]: And the war gets over, India gets freedom, Winston Churchill dies, all these years pass,
[Amit Varma]: 40 years pass.
[Amit Varma]: And in 1984, you still have this department with the audacity to ask for an increase in
[Amit Varma]: its budget.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, this was one of the rare cases when the department was actually shut down.
[Amit Varma]: But it took almost 40 years for that to happen.
[Guest]: Well, we've had examples like that in the United States.
[Guest]: We had a tea tasters board, a group of government employees who tasted all the tea that was
[Guest]: sold to make sure that it was made properly, I guess.
[Guest]: And it stayed around for 100 years.
[Guest]: I think we did finally get rid of it.
[Guest]: There were also mohair subsidies.
[Guest]: This is a kind of wool.
[Guest]: And I believe that goes back to making uniforms in World War I.
[Guest]: And here it is.
[Guest]: In the 1980s, they tried to get rid of it, but it came back because the mohair suppliers
[Guest]: continue to lobby Congress.
[Guest]: Every manufacturer, every producer has a lobby in Washington.
[Guest]: The problem is consumers and taxpayers don't have much of a lobby because their interests
[Guest]: are very diffuse.
[Guest]: But whatever you do for a living, whether it's making shoes or making cigars or creating
[Guest]: insurance, you have a lobby to protect your interest in your livelihood.
[Guest]: And that lobby is here in Washington, always making sure that there are no threats to your
[Guest]: subsidy or your protection.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, we've already spoken for one and a half hours and you promised me two hours
[Amit Varma]: and I've still got pages and pages of notes left.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't want to go much beyond the two hours you promised me.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe we'll save it for another episode.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just skip to, you know, rather than just the two of us sort of agreeing with each
[Amit Varma]: other and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: I thought it's fair for our listeners to bring up some sort of tough questions which libertarians
[Amit Varma]: typically get and which I'm really used to getting and check out your responses to them.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll begin with some of them.
[Amit Varma]: One of the questions I often get is that, look, libertarianism is so utopian.
[Amit Varma]: You know, is there a free market economy anywhere in the world?
[Amit Varma]: Why is there no libertarian state anywhere?
[Guest]: Well, you know, the world is a complex place and we've talked throughout this about reasons
[Guest]: that people oppose liberty or reasons that people don't oppose liberty, but they do want
[Guest]: little twists in it to benefit themselves.
[Guest]: So they did try a pure communist economy once and it was such a disaster.
[Guest]: They never did it again.
[Guest]: Is there a American conservatives often say there's no pure libertarian country?
[Guest]: Well, there's no pure conservative country, whatever that would mean.
[Guest]: What we do know is that after liberalism arose around 1700, England, the Netherlands, the
[Guest]: United States, eventually most of Europe, later much of the world moved in the direction
[Guest]: of liberalism or libertarianism.
[Guest]: And when they did, the results were good.
[Guest]: The richest countries in the world were the ones that followed the precepts of libertarianism
[Guest]: the most closely.
[Guest]: But it's a complex world and no, we never got rid of all intrusions into people's lives.
[Guest]: And liberalism or libertarianism is an unfolding idea.
[Guest]: It took a long time in the United States to convince Americans that all men are created
[Guest]: equal really meant all men, not to mention all women, and that black people should not
[Guest]: be treated the way they had been at the time of the Declaration of Independence.
[Guest]: So that was an advance toward freedom.
[Guest]: And later we said women also are adults who should be equal in their rights and responsibilities.
[Guest]: And much later, gay people were identified as people whose rights were being violated
[Guest]: by government.
[Guest]: And so in a lot of ways, we have continued to move toward recognition of equal liberty
[Guest]: and the removal of all the constraints of mercantilism and everything.
[Guest]: And meanwhile, there's a battle with people who want to impose new constraints.
[Guest]: But I do think I could tell you to go look at the Economic Freedom of the World Report
[Guest]: and see which countries have the most economic freedom and how well their economies are doing.
[Guest]: But I think people know that around the world, the more economic freedom there is, generally
[Guest]: the more other kinds of freedom, personal and political freedom you will see, and the
[Guest]: more economic growth and economic output you get.
[Guest]: And that's why around the world, the flows of immigration are to freer countries from
[Guest]: less free countries.
[Guest]: You don't generally see very many people trying to sneak in from Europe to China.
[Guest]: China has become a much better place than it used to be, but you still don't find people
[Guest]: coming from freer countries to try to sneak into it.
[Guest]: People vote with their feet.
[Guest]: They vote for freedom.
[Guest]: We don't have perfectly libertarian societies, but we have much more free societies in a
[Guest]: lot of places than we used to.
[Amit Varma]: And also nothing is a pernicious.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I think there can be no such thing as a perfect world.
[Amit Varma]: So the question for any individual should be not do you want to make the world perfect,
[Amit Varma]: which ain't ever going to happen, but do you want to make the world a little better off?
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, if you make it freer, you do indeed make it a little better off.
[Amit Varma]: Another question I have for you is, A, what do you think of the welfare state?
[Amit Varma]: And B, what do you have to say?
[Amit Varma]: And I get this a lot here in India.
[Amit Varma]: What do you have to say about the apparent success of the welfare states of Scandinavian
[Amit Varma]: in making the lives of the citizens better off?
[Guest]: Well, that's an interesting question.
[Guest]: I do believe that the welfare state, which means taxing people and taking money and transferring
[Guest]: it to other people, is a violation of people's rights.
[Guest]: And I also believe it's not a good way to make social progress.
[Guest]: We'll talk about the success of the Scandinavian countries, some other Western European countries.
[Guest]: There's no question those countries have been very successful of all the countries and eras
[Guest]: in the history of the world.
[Guest]: There aren't many that you would choose to live in over the social democracies of Western
[Guest]: Europe.
[Guest]: But the question is, did they become great places to live because they had large welfare
[Guest]: states, or did they develop large welfare states because they had already become such
[Guest]: good places to live that they had more money available to do things like that?
[Guest]: I just heard a talk from my Swedish colleague, Johan Norberg, about Sweden.
[Guest]: What happened in Sweden in the 1960s and 1970s when I was growing up, everybody said Sweden
[Guest]: is perfect.
[Guest]: Sweden is the perfect welfare state.
[Guest]: No one is poor.
[Guest]: The Swedish model, that was what we all were supposed to aspire to.
[Guest]: Follow the Swedish model.
[Guest]: Johan will tell you, Sweden was one of the earliest and most capitalist countries in
[Guest]: the world.
[Guest]: It became one of the richest countries in the world.
[Guest]: Starting around 1960, it did have an ideological change such that people said, hey, we have
[Guest]: all this money.
[Guest]: We should be able to eliminate poverty.
[Guest]: And they tried that for about a generation.
[Guest]: And in the past 20 years or so, they have realized it was too expensive.
[Guest]: It was hurting the Swedish work ethic.
[Guest]: It was hurting Swedish economic growth.
[Guest]: It was causing well-off people to leave Sweden to avoid their taxes.
[Guest]: And they have reined in their taxes and their welfare programs.
[Guest]: So they haven't gotten rid of them.
[Guest]: But they did realize they had gone too far.
[Guest]: And to some extent, that's true in Denmark and other places like that.
[Guest]: So there's no question that we're finding out you can maintain a welfare state and still
[Guest]: have a good society.
[Guest]: In my view, if you had much lower taxes and therefore much less transfer payment systems,
[Guest]: you would have more economic growth.
[Guest]: There would be more wealth to go around in society.
[Guest]: There would be more and better jobs for people.
[Guest]: And I would take a look at all the ways that the government makes it difficult for poor
[Guest]: people to succeed.
[Guest]: It has, at least in the United States, it has criminal laws such as drug prohibition
[Guest]: that dramatically increase incarceration and police presence in poor neighborhoods.
[Guest]: It has schools that are monopolized by the government and are much worse in areas where
[Guest]: people don't have much political power than they are in other places.
[Guest]: If we had a system of competing schools, people could choose what school to go to.
[Guest]: Poor people could get better schools for their children.
[Guest]: Welfare tends to trap people in poverty.
[Guest]: That's a problem we don't think about.
[Guest]: But if you're on welfare and your kids grow up on welfare and then they go on welfare,
[Guest]: I don't think those are very fulfilling lives.
[Guest]: And I think we should worry about that.
[Guest]: And we should try to find ways to help people become self-sufficient and make their own
[Guest]: way in the world with a sense of accomplishment rather than depending on government.
[Amit Varma]: And since you mentioned taxes, there's a great quote from your book on taxes as well, which
[Amit Varma]: is apart from the obvious moral cost and the violence involved, what's wrong with them
[Amit Varma]: like consequentially?
[Amit Varma]: And your quote is, quote, if taxes were lower, there would be more money in the private sector
[Amit Varma]: being directed to the satisfaction of consumer demand and more demand for workers and thus
[Amit Varma]: less unemployment.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I think one of the issues with Scandinavia is like you said, that they got to the level
[Amit Varma]: of prosperity they got to because of free markets and capitalism.
[Amit Varma]: And then when they did shift to becoming welfare states of the sort, which they became, you
[Amit Varma]: didn't have the counterfactual.
[Amit Varma]: Firstly, you didn't have the counterfactual of what would have happened if they hadn't
[Amit Varma]: become welfare states.
[Amit Varma]: And secondly, because they were already so prosperous, it didn't seem like anything bad
[Amit Varma]: happened at all.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there was still such great places to live in.
[Guest]: Well, that's right.
[Guest]: And I think you do have something of a counterfactual in the United States, having a smaller welfare
[Guest]: state than the Western European countries and having outstripped them in terms of economic
[Guest]: growth and employment.
[Guest]: European countries have had very high unemployment rates by American standards and youth unemployment
[Guest]: rates particularly high.
[Guest]: So they're good societies, but I don't believe it's a result of their high level of taxes
[Guest]: and transfers.
[Guest]: I think that's a drag on the prosperity that Europe could have and the jobs it could have
[Guest]: available.
[Amit Varma]: So my next question moves from the Scandinavian countries to America itself and recent events.
[Amit Varma]: Now, both you and I agreed that free trade is great.
[Amit Varma]: You know, every trade that takes place makes both parties better off.
[Amit Varma]: It's a positive sum game and countries aren't really trading with each other as individuals
[Amit Varma]: within countries who trade with each other.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, the balance of trade is not something we should ever worry about.
[Amit Varma]: But what's happened recently is because America in the past had embraced free trade to the
[Amit Varma]: extent that it did, what ended up happening was that the argument goes that the middle
[Amit Varma]: class in large parts of America saw their jobs being replaced by cheaper labor and cheaper
[Amit Varma]: goods from China and, you know, other Asian countries.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, while the individuals trading did benefit, you had large parts of middle
[Amit Varma]: America with jobs were lost or stagnated or middle class wages didn't really grow the
[Amit Varma]: way they should have, which led to a lot of resentment among those people and them asking
[Amit Varma]: that, listen, what is this free trade nonsense?
[Amit Varma]: We are not benefiting from it.
[Amit Varma]: So what are you talking about?
[Amit Varma]: And the result of that is Donald Trump, who's starting these infernal trade wars, which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I worry that India might also join in playing that negative sum game.
[Amit Varma]: But what do you say to those people in middle America who feel like that?
[Guest]: Well, the basic point is that getting more output from fewer people is the definition
[Guest]: of economic growth.
[Guest]: There was a time when 80 percent of Americans were farmers.
[Guest]: As late as 1900, I think it was around 50 percent.
[Guest]: Now less than 2 percent of Americans are farmers.
[Amit Varma]: It's 50 percent in India, by the way, I should tell you.
[Amit Varma]: OK.
[Guest]: And as you get richer, it will be less.
[Guest]: And so some people will say this market economy of yours is destroying jobs for farmers.
[Guest]: And that's true.
[Guest]: But the fact is, because we can now produce enough food for all Americans with only about
[Guest]: one and a half percent of Americans producing it, that means other Americans are freed up
[Guest]: to do other things that are more productive.
[Guest]: And initially, that mostly perhaps meant moving from the farm to the factory and manufacturing
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: But now manufacturing has gotten more efficient.
[Guest]: A lot of the decline in manufacturing jobs is because technology has gotten more sophisticated.
[Guest]: But some of it is that it turns out there are workers in India and China and other parts
[Guest]: of the world who at this point in development work for less money than American workers.
[Guest]: And that means that American consumers can buy things for less and have more money left
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: So it's just wrong to think that free trade has hurt the American economy.
[Guest]: It is true that if you had a good paying job as an auto worker or a steel worker and you
[Guest]: lost that because either the factory got more efficient or factories were built in China
[Guest]: and Mexico and so on, then you may very well have been hurt by that.
[Guest]: But the overall gains are substantial and your children are going to be better off.
[Guest]: They're going to get better jobs.
[Guest]: You know, working in a coal mine, a lot of people don't think that's such a great job.
[Guest]: Working on an assembly line, hard work, honest work, but probably not as pleasant a job as
[Guest]: a lot of jobs today.
[Guest]: So we're moving toward jobs and careers that are less demanding, less backbreaking than
[Guest]: farming was, than manufacturing was.
[Guest]: And that's all a good thing.
[Guest]: But it is true any business that fails is going to throw some people out of work.
[Guest]: If I own a restaurant and it just turns out it can't get enough customers and it goes
[Guest]: out of business, well, then I may have lost my investment and I don't have a job anymore
[Guest]: and other people don't have a job.
[Guest]: But the dynamic process of constantly pressing to serve consumers in the best way is what
[Guest]: creates moving from the standard of living of 1900 to 1950 to 2000 to what we have today.
[Guest]: And if you try to freeze it at any point, you will freeze yourself in to stagnation
[Guest]: at best.
[Guest]: So, yes, free trade is good for the whole society.
[Guest]: It's good for the whole world.
[Guest]: It is a bad thing that we have a president whose stock of economic knowledge, who is
[Guest]: not just ignorant of economics, is worse than ignorant because he holds tenaciously to ideas
[Amit Varma]: that are wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, this brings me naturally to sort of the next section, which is a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of questions I want to ask you about the challenges libertarians face and libertarian ideas face
[Amit Varma]: in general.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, like you pointed out, Trump is a man with very simplistic views of the
[Amit Varma]: world, but his simplistic narratives sell because people are drawn to simplistic narratives.
[Amit Varma]: So if an autoworker in Middle America has lost a job and he tells him and he says that,
[Amit Varma]: oh, okay, outsourcing is bad because your job got shipped overseas, or immigration is
[Amit Varma]: bad because some foreigner came and took it.
[Amit Varma]: Those are intuitive and simple narratives which are wrong, but which have a certain
[Amit Varma]: appeal there.
[Amit Varma]: And our challenges, a lot of the truths which we have discussed in this episode, the positive
[Amit Varma]: some nature of game that for, you know, if you and I trade, both of us can be better
[Amit Varma]: off for me to win, you don't have to lose or say spontaneous order are so counterintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you've been someone who's been in a think tank for so long.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, part of what you've sort of a challenge that you must have faced is disseminating
[Amit Varma]: these ideas and making them part of the discourse and common wisdom.
[Amit Varma]: But is that a difficult thing to do, given how incredibly counterintuitive they are and
[Amit Varma]: how they run counter to our instincts?
[Guest]: Well, yes, it's a challenge.
[Guest]: There are some simple ideas that at least in America, I think are widely held and correct,
[Guest]: you know, people have a right to live their lives any way they want to, as long as they
[Guest]: don't violate the equal rights of others.
[Guest]: I think Americans believe that.
[Guest]: It's just the application that can be difficult.
[Guest]: But it is a line you can use on an election platform.
[Guest]: Ronald Reagan talked that way.
[Guest]: And he gave speeches that people liked and he got elected.
[Guest]: So yes, a lot of the ideas are counterintuitive.
[Guest]: And so we have to constantly be explaining why it will not help low income workers to
[Guest]: set a minimum wage for their work, why it will not help the housing crisis in America
[Guest]: to put caps on rents.
[Guest]: All of these things are economics 101 and yet not easy to understand if you haven't
[Guest]: been in an economics classroom.
[Guest]: And that's why there is this constant process.
[Guest]: But we have made progress at it.
[Guest]: The economic freedom of the world has been going up over the past 40 years as we've been
[Guest]: measuring it.
[Guest]: So as difficult as it is, we know that we can sell some of these ideas.
[Guest]: Currently at the Cato Institute, we're engaged in a project to explain to people the costs
[Guest]: of the Jones Act, which says that anything shipped between two American ports must be
[Guest]: on U.S. crewed ships.
[Guest]: This is protectionism.
[Guest]: This is not good for American consumers.
[Guest]: We're going to try to explain that to people.
[Guest]: And there, the problem is not going to be explaining it.
[Guest]: The problem is going to be the public choice problem, that the people who have the most
[Guest]: influence over the policy are the ones who are out for their own good, not seeking the
[Guest]: public interest.
[Guest]: But yes, our challenge every day is to explain economic concepts in a way that people can
[Guest]: understand and appreciate, even though there are simplistic demagogues of both right and
[Amit Varma]: left arguing against them.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you and I and all libertarians are sort of belief passionately in the primacy
[Amit Varma]: and the dignity of the individual.
[Amit Varma]: You know, as Ayn Rand once said, the smallest minority is the individual, stock quote.
[Amit Varma]: And yet what has been happening recently is the rise of identity politics on both the
[Amit Varma]: right and the left, which focus more on groups rather than individuals and group rights more
[Amit Varma]: than individual rights.
[Amit Varma]: Is this something that is disturbing?
[Amit Varma]: And how can we counter it effectively?
[Guest]: It is disturbing, but I think conservatives sometimes are confused about the origins of
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: When you deny a certain group of people their equal liberty under law because they're part
[Guest]: of this group, like, for instance, the color of their skin or their religion or the fact
[Guest]: that they are gay, then it's natural that they organize on behalf of women's rights
[Guest]: or civil rights or gay rights.
[Guest]: And so that's a kind of identity politics.
[Guest]: But they aren't the ones who created the identity.
[Guest]: It was the ruling class that said black people are a separate class.
[Guest]: So who created identity politics?
[Guest]: Well, arguably, white people did.
[Guest]: They said we rank higher than these other people.
[Guest]: And so when the black people organized to defend their rights, some people said, you
[Guest]: know, oh, you shouldn't organize on the basis of race.
[Guest]: Well, you organized us on the basis of race.
[Guest]: Now, I think we've gotten to a point in the United States where we have made great progress
[Guest]: in all of those areas, and now the emphasis on identity politics, I think, does drive
[Guest]: us apart.
[Guest]: And it is a problem on both right and left, and neither side sees that it is part of the
[Guest]: problem.
[Guest]: But we are getting a sort of white identity politics that pushes not just for equal rights,
[Guest]: but for various kinds of prejudice and discrimination against other people.
[Guest]: And then you have some of these marginalized or formerly marginalized groups insisting
[Guest]: on very detailed applications of their definition of identity and privilege and so on.
[Guest]: So yes, it's very divisive.
[Guest]: And I think one of the biggest problems we have in the United States right now is this
[Guest]: racial divisiveness that is being exacerbated by politicians and activists on both sides
[Guest]: of the political spectrum.
[Amit Varma]: I have a couple of questions to end with.
[Amit Varma]: And the first of those questions is a rather provocative question that I'm not sure I have
[Amit Varma]: an answer for myself.
[Amit Varma]: So let me, you know, see what you think of it.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a two part question.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, and it's really a thought experiment.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say that 40 years from now, 50 years from now, you know, AI grows to the extent
[Amit Varma]: that it is literally embedded in our brains.
[Amit Varma]: And it's possible to sort of get information out of every human being not only to the extent
[Amit Varma]: of what are their desires, what do they want, but also what they will want to have for breakfast
[Amit Varma]: tomorrow.
[Amit Varma]: You can tell all that.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say and this is a thought experiment.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, bear with me, let's say Hayek's knowledge problem is completely solved.
[Amit Varma]: You can actually perfectly centrally plan a society because you have that information.
[Amit Varma]: Now number one, given that the consequential benefits of freedom no longer apply because
[Amit Varma]: the knowledge problem is solved.
[Amit Varma]: Is there still a moral case for freedom?
[Amit Varma]: That's question number one.
[Amit Varma]: And question number two is that if the consequences of freedom like right now, you know, you and
[Amit Varma]: I are in that lucky spot where we argue for freedom, we can do it from first principles
[Amit Varma]: and the right to self ownership.
[Amit Varma]: And we can say that look, freedom is good for everybody.
[Amit Varma]: But if freedom wasn't good for everybody, if the consequentialist case did not exist,
[Amit Varma]: if freedom actually made people worse off, then would there still be a moral case for
[Amit Varma]: it, which would, you know, go beyond that?
[Guest]: Well, let's see, those are big questions.
[Guest]: In your first question, you posited a huge assumption that AI can not only know, but
[Guest]: anticipate what we don't even know yet.
[Guest]: And therefore, the knowledge problem is solved.
[Guest]: I don't believe that's going to happen because I don't believe any algorithm can know what
[Guest]: I'm going to think tomorrow, especially when different circumstances are offered to me.
[Guest]: It's a thought experiment, it's a thought experiment, except by premise.
[Guest]: Let's assume that it can happen.
[Guest]: No, no, I think you're asking me, what if the world worked in a different way?
[Guest]: Well, but it doesn't work in a different way.
[Guest]: James Buchanan objected once to the invisible hand metaphor, because he said there is no
[Guest]: point toward which the invisible hand is moving you because the point, what people want, how
[Guest]: to satisfy their desires is constantly moving.
[Guest]: And so I just think you really are saying, what if humanity was different, would you
[Guest]: still favor the same rules?
[Guest]: Well, I don't favor individual rights for honeybees, but I don't believe humans are
[Guest]: honeybees and they're not going to be.
[Guest]: So therefore, I guess I would say in the first circumstance you described, a computer can
[Guest]: know not only everything I want right now and how I would order my preferences, but
[Guest]: how I will order my preferences tomorrow and a year from now and 10 years from now.
[Guest]: Well, then in that case, I'm still in favor of individual freedom because I am a rational
[Guest]: thinking being who ought to be allowed to make decisions.
[Guest]: Even if you said that, you know what decisions I'm going to make before I know it, I still
[Guest]: think I should be able to do it.
[Guest]: Now the second question, which I do think is somewhat different, what if our consequentialist
[Guest]: analysis and our lived experience persuaded us that free markets don't lead to the best
[Guest]: outcomes in terms of social harmony and economic growth?
[Guest]: Would I still favor freedom?
[Guest]: I think in that circumstance, you are talking about a different kind of being.
[Guest]: And so it's not a coincidence that respecting freedom leads to the best outputs.
[Guest]: It's because respecting freedom is respecting the nature of human beings.
[Guest]: So if the nature of human beings was different, if we were honeybees, then central direction
[Guest]: might make sense.
[Guest]: But we're not.
[Guest]: And so if you posit a world where central planning produces clearly better results than
[Guest]: relying on pluralism and decentralized markets, then I think you're talking about a different
[Guest]: kind of being and philosophers and theologians and all of us would think of the world in
[Guest]: a different way.
[Guest]: So I guess I'm not prepared to say, yes, I would support individual rights, even if I
[Guest]: knew it meant living like Venezuela instead of like Denmark, because it would be a different
[Guest]: world and it would be different human beings.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great answer.
[Amit Varma]: And your point about the honeybees reminded me of something A.O.
[Amit Varma]: Wilson once said, where he remarked that communism would have been perfect for ants.
[Amit Varma]: And his overall verdict on communism was great idea, wrong species.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's right.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm totally going to borrow your answer the next time someone throws this question
[Amit Varma]: back at me.
[Amit Varma]: A final question, David, you've been very kind with your time.
[Amit Varma]: So a final question.
[Amit Varma]: When you know, looking into the future, what makes you hope and what makes you despair
[Amit Varma]: about the prospect for individual?
[Guest]: I'm very troubled right now by the rise of illiberal authoritarianism, sort of on both
[Guest]: right and left, to the extent those categories make sense in a lot of countries around the
[Guest]: world.
[Guest]: It does feel kind of like is this the early 1930s with the rise of fascists and communists,
[Guest]: all these bad ideas, even stupid ideas like protectionism and socialism and ethnic nationalism
[Guest]: are back.
[Guest]: That makes me despair.
[Guest]: In the long run, I'm an optimist because freedom works and central planning and socialism and
[Guest]: fascism don't.
[Guest]: And once human beings discovered that progress was possible, that economic growth is possible,
[Guest]: I don't think in the long run they will put up with people and classes and policies that
[Guest]: severely impede that.
[Guest]: So a hundred years from now, will people be freer and will we be richer?
[Guest]: Yes, I'm pretty confident of that.
[Guest]: 500 years from now?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: I know there are people who talk about cycles of history and so on, but I think the industrial
[Guest]: revolution, liberalism, what Deirdre McCloskey calls the great enrichment, as she says, is
[Guest]: the most important thing that happened since we settled down and started farming.
[Guest]: And so we will have all sorts of cycles and changes, but freedom works and people will
[Guest]: want the fruits of freedom and over the long run, we're going to move more of the world,
[Guest]: we'll move more in the direction of more freedom.
[Amit Varma]: David, over the years, I've learned a lot reading your books and I've learned a lot
[Amit Varma]: chatting with you today.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the scene in the Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you very much for the opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, I suggest you hop over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or otherwise and buy The Libertarian Mind by David Bose.
[Amit Varma]: These other books are also linked on the episode page and I'd in fact advise you to look at
[Amit Varma]: the show notes for this episode on the episode page and check out some of the readings that
[Amit Varma]: I've recommended there.
[Amit Varma]: I'd also done a past episode on libertarianism where I was a guest and I was interviewed
[Amit Varma]: on another podcast, a Pragati podcast by my friend Pawan Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: So that sort of has my own thoughts on libertarianism where I place consent at the center of everything.
[Amit Varma]: Do check that out.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow David on Twitter at David underscore Bose, which is D A V I D underscore B O A
[Amit Varma]: Z.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A M I T B A R M A.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene in the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent center
[Amit Varma]: for research and education in public policy.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse all our past episodes at sceneunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening and do consider, I didn't force you to listen.
[Unknown]: It was a voluntary action.
[Unknown]: How aware do you think you are of your laws and rights?
[Unknown]: Do you look up to laws when you are caught up in situations?
[Unknown]: Do you know what your rights are when you're stuck somewhere bad?
[Unknown]: Well, here's a show that can help you move an inch closer to being aware of what your
[Unknown]: rights are.
[Unknown]: Tune in to know your Kanun with me Amar Rana.
[Unknown]: This is a podcast meant to answer all your law related queries.
[Unknown]: Catch Know Your Kanun every week on the IBM website or the app or anywhere you get your
[Unknown]: podcast from.
[Unknown]: Do you wish you were smarter?
[Unknown]: Well so do we.
[Unknown]: But the next best thing we could make you sound smarter and to help you with this endeavor,
[Unknown]: we are simplified a podcast that attempts to break down the complex world around you
[Unknown]: with a little knowledge, a lot of poor jokes and a ton of random trivia.
[Unknown]: Episodes out every Monday on the IBM podcast app or wherever you get your podcasts.
[Unknown]: See ya!